I bought one of those, Olympic or Olympia, and the damn thing has never worked, and I spent over $200 off the cabins.
This is my third one, and I found them indestructible.
Really?
Yeah.
I bought one at the London airport.
That's where I bought one.
Because it looks so nice.
It is wonderful.
It takes one battery, and it automatically reverses itself.
You get three hours on it.
erases itself, it's undependable.
Well, that, what you have to do, what I just did, is put it on hold, because what happens is when you put it, I don't need to be very quick.
Those things, you never again believe in it.
However, if you trust it, fine.
I don't know what Elizabeth told you, but this is Fitzgerald, this is Fitzgerald.
Some of it,
is of supreme value.
Hemingway is there.
Now, for example, the only set of the galleys of the unpublished Gatsby, Trimalchio.
There it is.
Isn't that something?
Trimalchio.
Wow.
And when the show read it,
He then took the other set, or his set, cut them up, marked them up, pasted, patched them, glued on inserts, and made The Great Gatsby.
This is Trimalchio, the first and presumably finished version of The Great Gatsby that was never published.
Wow.
And I always like to show this.
I went with John Cohn.
Seven Gabriel books, $2,860.
That includes 10% for John.
That's a steal even then.
That's a steal 33 years ago.
Yeah, roughly I paid $2,500 in 1971.
It's got to be worth a quarter of a million.
Well, how can you... Was this because they were being nice to you, or do you think it was... It was an auction.
It was an auction?
Yes.
This was an auction?
Yeah.
Wow.
How does something like that slip through the cracks, or was his reputation that's set?
No.
In those days, collectors still didn't understand about galley proofs.
And two things happened the day of the sale.
One is the blind book collector that Arlen mentioned last night, Bob Samsel, said that he was planning to bid.
$5,000, and he knew that I wanted it, and so therefore he would lend me for up to $5,000 if I needed it.
And the other one was a phone call from Mel Edelstein, collector of modern poetry, librarian, who said, I hear you're bidding on those galley proofs.
Have you gone crazy?
Oh, really?
At that time, 1971, collectors were still high spot collectors.
Well, maybe he was trying to scare you off, you think?
No, no.
He thought you were crazy.
Yeah, he thought I was crazy.
At that time, collectors wanted high spots.
They didn't understand about the value of proofs.
So as a scholar, what does something like this give you?
It gives me and my students a chance to see how a genius
took something that was brilliant to begin with and turned it into a masterpiece.
And you can actually track that from one state to the next?
Yeah.
I've taught one course in which each student had a copy of the published Gatsby, and I read the galley version aloud, and we stopped, and we argued about all important revisions.
And you were able
to really discuss the creative process one, one stay tuned.
Well, this, I'm jumping, I'm getting ahead.
That's fine, but it's okay, I'd like to jump around.
I want to show you what I regard as the greatest teaching tool ever invented, but people keep moving it.
Bear with me for a moment, because this makes the point better.
This isn't bad.
You hang on to that, I'll come back to you.
As a matter of fact, it's more than not bad.
I'll read F. Scott Fitzgerald, The Offshore Pirate, TypeScript, 1920.
Last page, number 38 of TypeScript, a short story published in the post, with revised conclusion.
We'll come to it.
Okay, I'm just saying that for the benefit of my machine and what I'm holding.
But the great item, I swear the thing has legs.
It walks all over the vault.
It's never in the same place twice.
See, when I saw that canceled check, I saw seven-year-old, so I thought you were buying it from a bookseller.
No, no.
That's why.
I didn't realize that was an open warfare there.
John went to bid for me.
But he was your agent.
And John couldn't believe in the prices that Modern Firsts were bringing.
I remember his outrage when Catcher in the Rye in Dust Jacket bought $30.
He said this was ruining the book business.
So I didn't trust John.
I wanted him to bid, but I knew he was perfectly capable of stopping what he thought the price was absurdly high.
So I went and sat next to him and kept elbowing him to keep him going.
I'm surprised somebody like Will Feldman didn't buy that for Harry Ransom at 71.
That would have been during his—they really fell down on that, luckily for you.
You sound as though I shouldn't have gotten it.
No, no, I'm thrilled that you got it.
I'm just, no, I'm delighted that you were able to steal it, basically.
So I'm marveling at the apparent stupidity of your rivals for not recognizing the value of the object, the artifact.
Well, I said, people still didn't feel comfortable buying galley proofs.
And of course, the one I'm looking for is not here.
because I missed it.
However, oh, oh, oh, oh.
There it is.
Well, this is the passports.
Oh, they'll have it.
Well, you're going to have to find it.
You're going to fret about it all day.
No, I just went past it because I was talking.
But this will do.
OK.
One of Fitzgerald's most pleasing early stories
during that period when he was appearing in the Sad Evening Post in the year 1920, almost every other week, was Offshore Pirate.
And as you know, it's a fantasy story, an imaginative story about a young man who wins
an unobtainable, strong-willed girl by staging this elaborate act of piracy.
And here's the typescript, which ends with the explanation that it was all a dream.
It never happened.
Corny.
Bad.
And in proof, he... I'm sorry to say bad.
But a dream ending is always corny.
Anybody can have a dream ending.
And it was all a dream.
It never happened.
And then he rewrote it.
And this is the original?
No, this is the original.
This is the rejected version.
And the published story was real.
It really happened.
This man did.
They changed the story entirely.
He did.
Not they.
He.
They.
You said rejected.
Rejected by him.
Yes.
OK.
I'm sorry.
And the published story takes the action as real.
He did stage a piracy, but the published story ends with the line, she kissed him in the illustration.
One of the best sentences Fitzgerald ever wrote.
because he's having it at least two ways at once.
He's saying, this really happened, but he's also saying, look, it's just a story.
She kissed him in the illustration.
And you say that's a great teaching tool because it demonstrates for your students.
Yes, sir.
I don't have a question.
I want you to say it.
All right.
What it seems to be for the students is how authors, in flashes of inspiration, return to a presumably finished work.
And where the first is probably still the best.
And make it better.
I'm sorry about this.
It really bothers me.
I know.
And it's going to bother you all day until you find it.
I know it.
We'll talk about other things.
Here is an unpublished Fitzgerald story.
This was a story he wrote in 1920.
Question mark.
The title.
No, it's 1920.
He probably wrote it in Westport, Connecticut.
The Couple, is that the title?
Yes.
And Fitzgerald didn't think it was worth publishing.
and he never attempted to sell it.
And so what do you think, having read it multiple times, I'm sure?
It's a bad story.
His judgment was right.
Yeah.
And I have made no attempt to publish it, although I don't control the rights, of course, but it would be possible to obtain publication rights.
Here.
Maybe the best book in the vault.
The first of Ulysses unfortunately rebound, but the Paris Ulysses
with a letter from james joyce dear mr fitzgerald here with is the book you gave me you gave me signed and and i am doing adding adding a portrait of the artist as a once young man wow with the thanks of your much obliged but much
pusillanimous friend, James Joyce.
Wow.
And it's dated 11... 1928.
...7, 1928.
And it's even got his return address up there.
And... ...on stationery.
The copy also has Fitzgerald's annotations.
In the section which is written as a series of parodies of British authors by James Joyce, Fitzgerald attempted to identify
the subject of each parody.
Now, can you comprehend Fitzgerald's reading of this?
I mean, can you see whether or not this book is having any kind of an impact on him as a reader?
None whatsoever.
As a writer, yes.
As a writer, no.
Fitzgerald did not try to imitate James Joyce.
By the time Ulysses was published, 1922, Fitzgerald's style, Fitzgerald's technique was formed.
Have you ever tried to?
Let me finish the story.
That says, I'm going to, thank you for asking me to inscribe Ulysses.
I'm going to throw in Portrait of an Artist, right?
There's the copy he threw in.
To Scott Fitzgerald, James Joyce, Paris, 11-7-8, 19-28.
Can you imagine the odds against matching up?
And you acquired these separately?
Thank you.
Well, that's brilliant.
That's wonderful.
Which did you get first?
That.
And so then were you on the hunt for the numbers?
Yeah, then I knew what to look for.
For whom the bell tolls, to Scott with affection and esteem, earnest for whom the bell tolls.
And in remarkably nice condition, too.
He kept it in pretty decent condition, didn't he?
Do you think he read that copy?
Yeah.
That copy?
I think that's the copy that Fitzgerald read.
Unfortunately, Fitzgerald was not a scribbler.
He didn't make notes in the margins.
And you say, unfortunately, which I agree with.
I mean, the obtuse collector would say, we don't want anybody fooling around.
It would teach us.
It would tell us what Fitzgerald looked for.
Do you have a sense of Fitzgerald as a reader?
Fitzgerald was a sensitive, intelligent critic.
And the image of Fitzgerald as simply very facile is misleading and destructive.
The man who wrote The Great Gatsby, the man who wrote Tender is the Night, was a man with delicate literary sensibility.
Now, here, this is the best teaching
machine I've ever seen.
And it's a sheet of paper that you're holding?
In 1929, Fitzgerald wrote a side-needing post story called The Swimmers.
It starts off brilliantly.
It has intimate connections with Tender is the Night, but it ends up with a trick ending, unfortunately.
But it was Fitzgerald's custom to end a story with
a philosophical meditation, usually written in a meditative, brooding style.
And here is a story in which Fitzgerald wrote the ending.
I'm sorry, in longhand, right?
No, it's typed.
Oh, I was looking down here.
Okay, this is typed.
You're going to let me do it?
No, no.
It's my collection, goddammit.
I love this.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
I apologize.
The typescript, and Fitzgerald never typed, by the way.
He would have his manuscript, he wrote in pencil, on paper, the way God intended.
He would have the secretary's
type the thing triple-spaced, and then he would go over the typescript once, twice, three times if necessary, having the secretary retype it every time until he got it the way he wanted, even for the much maligned, the much misunderstood Saturday Evening Post stories.
As Gerald writes, it's a story about the meaning, it's a story that contrasts America with Europe.
Better than Henry James ever did.
So at the end of the story, Fitzgerald is summarizing his feelings about America.
France was a land.
England a people.
Was a people.
Oh, sorry.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Okay.
I shouldn't be reading over your shoulder.
Go ahead.
You know, you'd have a lot of trouble getting through one of my courses.
I would.
Maybe I'll get too excited.
France was a land.
The typescript reads.
Typescript.
England was a people.
No, England a people.
I'm reading from the typescript.
England a people.
Yes.
Sorry, I have a silly scheduling question to ask you.
They're going to have books at the dinner for you to sign.
Happily.
And there's some time beforehand during the reception.
They can also make time at the end of the dinner.
Whenever is appropriate.
It's fine with me.
Okay.
Thank you.
Once again.
The typescript reads, France was a land, England are people, but America was the grave's hat.
And he leaves a blank because he doesn't know what battle he wants.
And the tired, drawn, nervous faces of its great men.
And the country boys dying in the Argonne for a phrase that was empty before their body withered.
It was a willingness of the heart.
This is wonderful.
Now that is brilliant and moving and even profound.
Then he takes his pencil and he takes something that any writer would give, at least one hand to be able to write.
Then he takes his pencil and he converts something brilliant into something... A masterpiece, maybe?
Unexcelled.
masterpiece.
Why not?
I am now going to read the revised version with Fitzgerald's handwritten inserts, revisions, improvements.
France was a land.
England was a people.
Fitzgerald always heard his prose, and he always revised not just for sense, but for rhythm.
England was a people, but America
And then he inserts, having about it, still, that quality of the idea was harder to utter.
It was.
The grave's at, and he gets the battle, Shiloh, and the tired, drawn, nervous faces of his great men, and he takes a rather choppy series of sentences, and he links them up, and
The country boys dying in the Argonne for a phrase that was empty before their bodies withered.
It was a willingness of the heart.
And I Xeroxed this up and I pass it out to the students, every course.
And being the kind of person I am, I say, if this doesn't make it clear to you how Fitzgerald's art operated, please find another course.
The first time I saw this, it was an obscure story.
Fitzgerald never collected it in his lifetime.
Even for me, the insertion of a semicolon, for instance, you're talking about the rhythms of the writing.
This was one paragraph.
He's now not only connected the paragraphs, but he continues it as a sentence.
It's breath-taking for me, really, it is.
Now, the story was never collected by Fitzgerald, and the first time I read it,
was when I read John Gunther's USA.
And that paragraph is the epigraph in USA.
And it didn't say F. Scott Fitzgerald the Swimmers.
It said F. Scott Fitzgerald.
It's maddening when they do that.
It took me months of going through old Saturday evening posts on microfilm.
Why do they do that?
See, they don't have to identify in the epigraph, and it drives me nuts.
They should identify in the epigraph.
That's wonderful.
That's Fitzgerald's briefcase.
Oh, really?
I've got to give a touch to that.
This is the briefcase that Fitzgerald had in Hollywood.
Well, you'll notice the gold stamping says, Scott Fitzgerald, 597 Fifth Avenue.
That's the Scribner Building.
Of course, Fitzgerald didn't have a home.
Fitzgerald's home was the Scribner Building.
That is very telling, isn't it?
It really is very telling.
Now, there's a good story with this.
This came up at an auction in New York at which the star item was a piece of pickled Columbus.
They would do that.
You know, when a great person died, they'd hack off a hunk of the body and preserve it.
And the great item was a piece of pickled Columbus.
Purportedly so.
And I happened to be in New York.
I didn't go off especially.
But maybe there are no accidents in book collecting.
So I went by the auction house to watch the Fitzgerald sale, because I knew Fitzgerald's briefcase was in the same sale as Christopher Columbus.
Is this what you were targeting, this item, or were the other items there?
I just went to watch.
You just went to watch.
You were there for this.
Yeah.
Don't tell me you weren't.
Columbus comes up first.
There's one bidder, and the television cameras are there, and the reporters are there, because, you know, great things are expected.
They're expecting fierce competition.
They buy it in.
And the television cameras were there, and the bidding, one bidder, and it went for around $5,000.
So you got it.
They didn't buy it in?
No.
It went for about $5,000.
Then the briefcase came up.
And I thought I was just watching.
TV cameras still there?
No.
Yes, they were there, but they weren't running.
But they weren't interested.
No, they weren't interested.
I thought I was just watching.
But the high bidder, the person who looked as though he was going to be the winning bidder, was a collector I don't like.
Was it?
I won't say.
Was a collector I don't like.
A rival for Fitzgerald?
No.
Just an individual.
Okay.
Call it.
And I found my right hand automatically going up, and I took it at ten.
Ten what?
A thousand.
Well, that's a lot.
At which point the reporters came up, and they said, do you have a statement?
And I said, yes.
It's more important to write The Great Gatsby than to discover Puerto Rico.
They said, my God, we can't use that.
Now, I had a problem.
I was sitting there with maybe $100 in my pocket.
And as you know, you're supposed to settle up on the spot.
So I went to the counter, and I said, I'll be back in two hours with $10,000.
Right around Manhattan.
Isn't that wonderful?
Seeing all my friends.
I got a thousand from one friend, and I got five.
And I came back with $10,000 and borrowed money.
About how long ago is this, Steve?
Do you know our fans, roughly?
Oh, Jesus.
Frase was still alive, because Frase, uh, Fraser Clark, my partner.
Fraser Clark was one of the people I borrowed money from.
He was having lunch at the plaza.
I interrupted his lunches and went, give me everything you've got.
Help, help.
Uh, had to be 20 years ago.
20 years ago, okay.
Yeah, because this is still just before this whole passion for the material artifacts.
But what I like about it is that his address...
It was 597.
But it's all part of this persona that he was the Scott Fitzgerald.
It's a Fifth Avenue address, and it's not his.
What more do you need to say?
It's wonderful.
It's the Scribner building.
It's fabulous.
That's great.
That's a great story.
Did you saw clearly you had a paddle number when you were there?
You must have gone to register.
You didn't need one?
No, not in those days.
You just walked in and you stuck up your hand.
It's quite informal.
Yeah, not anymore.
The millionaire.
Yeah, exactly.
All right, I'd like to, oh.
Zelda painting.
We said last night that Arlen had given her Zelda collection.
These are two of Arlen's Zelda paintings.
Zelda painted more flowers than anything else.
That's kind of nice.
What do you make of them?
Well, this one I like because it's not just signed.
She rarely signed.
It's signed, but I think the fact that the flowers are in a broken
bowl has some significance.
Indeed.
Some meaning.
Sure.
Now, did she date it?
We don't know.
No.
No, but I bought it in Nashville, North Carolina, so it's a good supposition that it was done while she was a patient at the— And, of course, the scene would fit, wouldn't it, the broken bowl?
At the sanitarium.
This is exciting.
These are the treasures.
But the showroom is more fun.
How could anything be more fun than the other?
What do you see?
You never lose your passion for this, do you?
For as long as you've been hunting it, it just seems to give you a charge every time you pick it up.
How do you explain that?
How do you try to?
You know, you never become... I'll give you an answer, which is... I can't understand the people who aren't always excited about what they do.
Okay.
If you're not doing what excites you, then you damn well better find something else that does excite you.
So for you, what comes first?
The scholar, the collecting, the publishing?
I mean first.
Don't worry about it.
Did I do that?
No, the floor was badly built.
Has that happened before?
Oh, every day.
What comes first?
The book.
If I'm asked to describe myself, I'm a bookman.
Everything I do, everything I write, everything I buy,
has to do with the role of the book in American culture, and beyond that, the profession of authorship.
I think most of the teaching of literature is terribly flawed because the author
is ignored.
With all of this nonsense about postmodernism, all of this nonsense about, they actually say, the author is dead.
All of this nonsense about pure criticism injures the work, certainly injures the students.
And my collections
And I formed, what, maybe 15 major collections?
Major, major collections.
My collections always have the rationale of documenting the profession of authorship in the case of this author.
And this is what this room does.
When we built the room, we assumed that it was adequate.
Within a month, it was inadequate.
There is almost half as much again back in the rare book stacks.
When we get the new building, I am going to fight mightily to get a room big enough to hold all the Fitzgerald.
In general, this wall is books by F. Scott Fitzgerald.
The handle is, the goal is, every printing of every edition of every book by F. Scott Fitzgerald in the English language.
And I've damn near done it.
Damn near done it.
Paperback, everything.
That wall is the about wall.
Fitzgerald's Friends, Paris in the 20s, the House of Scribner, Maxwell Perkins.
I had started a Hemingway collection, but when we bought the great Hemingway collection, it was foolish for me to compete with my own collection, so to speak.
So that's the
So those are like the C, D, and E items, whatever they... That's the odds and ends of Hemingway.
But there's Edmund Wilson, there's Bud Showberg.
I'm working very hard to build a Bud Showberg collection.
There's Don Ogden Stewart, who I think is the funniest American humorist of the 20s and now completely forgotten, unknown.
There's Donald Ogden Stewart.
I mentioned Edmund Wilson.
There's Ring Lordner.
They're all the people
Fitzgerald was close to in a professional or literary way.
I get it.
At the top are translations.
I don't like them.
But when they're offered to me, I buy them.
But my feeling is if God wanted them to read Fitzgerald, he would have made them Americans or Englishmen.
How the hell can you translate The Great Gatsby?
Well, but he certainly resonates with readers outside of the United States.
I don't think so.
You don't think so?
So you think he's a uniquely an American phenomenon?
I don't think any great author's style translates.
I think all translations are glorified master plots or Cliff's notes.
I don't see how the hell.
So that excludes Dante from our cork horses, then?
No, it doesn't exclude, but you ought to know what you're reading.
You're not reading Dante.
You're reading Dante rewritten by somebody else in another language.
Which is why Blake taught himself all these languages, so he could read them in the original.
I think so.
Now, my favorite spot in the room is, watch, from here to here,
Okay, maybe 12 linear feet, let's say.
And from here to here, every one of those books is inscribed by or to Fitzgerald.
Every one of those books Fitzgerald held and may have read.
There are more books inscribed by Fitzgerald on these shelves than any place else in the world.
And.
So there has to be a couple of favorites here that they're really... How about I show you a favorite?
No, that's not it.
This favorite, yeah.
When The Great Gatsby was published, Fitzgerald was in Paris.
Actually, he was in France on his way to Paris, so he couldn't sign copies of the book.
Instead, he wrote inscriptions on slips of paper, sent them to Maxwell Perkins, and told Perkins to paste these in the books.
Here is the copy that went to Van White Brooks.
Wow.
Now, and he mentions reading Van White Brooks.
And he says, what?
I've taken the liberty of sending you this after having run across a copy of America's Coming of Age, a Brooks book, in a bookstore here, and bought it and read it with enormous pleasure.
Capri, actually, Italy.
You hadn't even gotten to France yet, F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Now, that's nice.
It's very nice.
It gets better.
Because here is Fitzgerald's copy of Van White Brooks's Ordeal of Mark Twain.
So I'm putting together the connections between Fitzgerald and Van White Brooks.
Brooks reciprocates.
by sending Fitzgerald.
Yeah, I'm just checking the years on it, so they're following in pretty close order, yeah.
Brooks reciprocates by sending Fitzgerald an inscribed copy of his Henry James book.
Now, do these fellows know each other, or is it strictly a correspondence kind of?
Strictly a correspondence.
They had— This is the pilgrimage of Henry James.
They had probably met at some literary reception in New York,
because Edmund Wilson wrote an article for The New Republic entitled Unlikely Encounters, which purports to be a report of a conversation between Van White Brooks and F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Maybe it happened, maybe it didn't happen, maybe Edmund Wilson was getting an article.
All of you journalists are notoriously untrustworthy in that matter.
But there's the copy of The Great Gatsby that Fitzgerald sends to Van White Brooks, and it's backed up by the book Brooks sends to Fitzgerald and Fitzgerald's copy of Brooks' biography of Mark Twain.
But I always play the game when people come, and the game is pick a book.
Pick a book.
Any book?
You want me to pick a book?
Luck of the draw.
Pick a book.
Okay.
This is where you can't tell a book by its cover, so let's just pick something just totally that makes, that doesn't resonate with a title or anything like that.
James Branch Campbell.
Who would not be regarded today as a major author, maybe a major, minor author, but I'm sure there are people who might dispute that, but here we go.
For Scott Fitzgerald, anything hereinafter, which he may happen to like.
with the best wishes of Branch Campbell, 27 September, 1934.
Yes, 27 or 29.
So actually, any book we pull out, look, he kept us in pretty good shape, didn't he?
Yeah.
I think.
So let's pick another one.
Do it again.
There must be one that you'd jump at pretty quickly.
Let's pick this copy of Caps at Reveille, Scrivener.
Oh, this is wonderful.
Yeah, this is good, isn't it?
Yeah.
This is a whole full page of inscription to Anna Williamson, A-N-N-A-H.
Other people were young once, just like you.
They broke their hearts over things that now seem trivial, but they were their own hearts, and they had the right to meddle with them in their own way.
F. Scott Fitzgerald, Asheville, 1936, courtesy of D.W., whatever that is.
Dorothy Williamson.
was Fitzgerald's nurse during the crack-up period in Asheville.
So, is this a pretty interesting inscription?
I think so.
Interesting beyond the wonderful... Well, you know, most other authors do best wishes.
That's right.
Good luck.
Fitzgerald almost always managed to say something witty, something warm, and often he managed to say something about the book.
For example,
The failure of Tender is the Night never stopped hurting him.
No, this won't do it.
And so when he inscribed Tenders, he would give people instructions on how to read it.
Look at that.
Yeah, that's a nice inscription.
That's a great chest jacket, too, isn't it?
Yeah.
Look, it's a whole page.
Yeah, full page inscription to an English lady he knew on the Riviera, and reminding her of the good times they had on the Riviera.
But she kept it very nice, didn't she?
The ones... It's astonishing to me that people trust those jackets, which are so beautiful.
Yeah.
For Ned Griffith, who was someone Fitzgerald knew in Hollywood, a Hollywood writer, who liked Gatsby with the recommendation that someday he dip into this, this being tender as the night, at page 151, and if he is interested in those chapters, goes back and reads the story with admiration from Scott Fitzgerald, Hollywood, 1939.
Why is he flagellating himself here?
And that inscription, in other words,
Bless you.
Same message, same content is repeated at least a dozen times.
He was so concerned that people were confused by the flashback structure, that he would go around telling people how to read the book.
You'd never know this as a scholar and as a writer.
as an observer of Fitzgerald.
You'd never know this about him if you didn't collect his books.
Correct.
Is that right?
Yeah.
So this is where really a collector of other people's copies of your subjects' books gives you something, doesn't it?
I have written maybe three books about Tender is the Night and how to read it.
And these inscriptions have been of enormous help to me because they told me
what Fitzgerald's intentions were.
And I am a devout intentionalist surrounded by colleagues who say the author doesn't know what he's doing, and even if he does, it doesn't matter.
Whereas I say, if the author doesn't know what he's doing, why read the fucking thing?
Of course the author knows what he's doing.
Genius always knows what it's doing.
And, uh,
Well, Fitzgerald's inscriptions, which help us, not me, us, to understand Fitzgerald's intentions for the work he inscribed, are invaluable keys to how to read.
Tender is the night.
How to read.
This Side of Paradise, How to Read the Great Gatsby.
And in this particular book, he apparently felt that they weren't reading it properly.
This book above perhaps?
No, but he's saying it was his fault.
He's saying, I did it wrong.
That's what he's saying.
So you think if he had a chance to take a second whack at this?
Well, he did.
Famously, when he died, they found among his possessions a copy of Tender is the Night, disbound.
with the chapters reordered, with a note saying, this is the final version of my book.
Kind of like a deathbed edition.
As I would like to see it published.
And in 1951, Malcolm Cowley edited and published the so-called author's final version of Tender, 1951.
seven years after the initial publication of Tender.
And instead of everybody, all the readers, all the reviewers, saying, oh boy, now, at long last, we have the book the way it should be, it made no impression at all.
Because whatever flaws there are in the 1934 edition, that's the way the author wrote it.
That's right.
Do you agree with that?
Of course.
I do, too.
That's the way it is.
And you can't fret about it.
You just have to go on.
What else would you like to see?
You want to talk about the things in the walls?
You're doing splendidly.
I'm following your cues here.
I'm thrilled with everything that you're showing me.
That's the earliest Fitzgerald manuscript I've ever seen.
It was a poem he wrote in prep school.
You wouldn't predict that this man would write tender as the night.
This was written at Newman School, that prep school he attended in Hackensack, New Jersey.
Helen and Dorothy, I love you with all the love that mortal can, but nevertheless I'm a bit more true to the old, old sweetheart, wonderful Anne.
Then the second stanza, he gets into trouble.
Marie and Loey and Antoinette, Eleanor Kitty and Dream Babette, girls in the East, girls in the West,
I really don't know which I like the best.
To call it Juvenalia is to give a deaf book, but it's fabulous.
You're talking about a book, you are a book man first.
When you're talking about book, is it the book, or are we talking about fiction here in your view?
You also use book and literature almost.
I'm talking about the book as the expression of a genius's mind.
And since I was trained by the greatest textual scholar who ever lived, the greatest bibliographical theorist who ever lived, Fredson Bowers at the University of Virginia, I was trained in the methods of recovering the author's intention, the way to edit what was called in those days a definitive edition.
And so therefore, I have done definitive editions of Gatsby,
Tender and The Last Tycoon, for which I recovered Fitzgerald's title, The Love of the Last Tycoon.
That was Fitzgerald's title.
It was published as The Last Tycoon because Edmund Wilson, who did the salvage job, didn't like Love of the Last Tycoon, and he called it The Last Tycoon.
But I have done what used to be called definitive editions, which has become a junk word.
That word definitive.
has become cheapened and meaningless.
So I prefer to use the term critical edition.
A critical edition is an edition based on all of the drafts, pre-publication material, as well as the alterations and revisions the author may have made in the book post-publication, when the book was reset.
And impossible to do it.
without the material in this room.
If there was a reason for building the collection, it was so I could do critical editions of F. Scott Fitzgerald.
What other authors do you feel deserve or would warrant this kind of ?
Hemingway certainly deserves it, but the Hemingway establishment
causes me to grieve.
I don't think Hemingway is in good hands.
Hemingway certainly deserves it.
Faulkner certainly deserves it.
In 20th century writers, Dos Passos, probably.
Probably USA requires editing.
Editing in the sense of recovering and preserving Das Paso's intentions.
You were involved some years back on recovering what you called lost.
For seven years, I was director of the Center for Editions of American Authors.
which was funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities.
And we did Hawthorne, and we did Melville, and we did Emerson, and we did Thoreau, and we did Whitman, the American classics.
Oh, sure.
So then we have the Library of America trying to do that, doing that.
Well, I have grave reservations about the Library of America.
I've never seen a nonprofit organization so profitable.
But the Center of Editions of American Authors, or CAA, as it was called, had 144 definitive editions or critical editions completed at the time I resigned.
But was it largely 19th-century type of authors that you mentioned?
It's always better if you can work on an author who's in public domain.
Sure.
Because if they're in copyright, their families can drive you crazy.
Indeed, and undoubtedly will drive you crazy, not only can.
What can you tell about Fitzgerald from his own reading of other people's books?
He was not the uneducated,
man that the rumors would have.
Sure, he was probably the worst student Princeton ever had.
Doesn't signify anything.
Fitzgerald knew that there was nothing in the chemistry classrooms and the math classrooms at Princeton he needed, that he could possibly use.
So he flunked out.
because he neglected the required courses, and he wrote for every publication at Princeton, with the exception of the Daily Princetonian.
But he wrote three Triangle Club shows, wrote his first Triangle Club show as a freshman.
Wow.
He wrote whole issues of the Princeton Tiger overnight.
He wrote serious short stories
and a great deal of poetry.
When he was at Princeton, he wasn't sure whether he wanted to be a novelist or a poet for the Nassau Literary Magazine.
And this section here has all of his Princetoniana, some of it very rare.
In addition, it has the
second of the only known two complete runs of his St.
Paul Academy, which was a day school.
He attended in St.
Paul between 1910 and 1912.
This volume, which unfortunately was rebound when I got it, and for some reason, the issues weren't bound in chronological order.
Nonetheless, this volume is a complete set
of the issues of the St.
Paul Academy now and then, 1910, 1912, which has all of Fitzgerald's earliest publications.
That's what matters.
And there are two sets in the world, reputedly one at the St.
Paul Academy, which I've never seen, and this one.
There you go.
Pretty good, and in remarkably great shape.
Are you able to assess the impact that Fitzgerald had on, you know, the readership, his times, and whether or not you feel, and I don't want to really mean to go off on a wild tangent, but I am kind of interested in your thoughts on, is it possible for a novelist, a fiction writer today, to have the kind of impact that people, that writers such as Fitzgerald might have had?
I think not because of electronic.
So you are fearful then that this is... Publication.
Fitzgerald was a words-on-paper writer.
Fitzgerald wrote at the time when reading was not just a habit of certain people, but when everybody read.
It was a time when there were
scores of mass-circulation magazines, and they all had fiction.
It was a time when there were—every American city had multiple newspapers.
People read the morning paper, people read the afternoon paper.
I did, too.
My father brought home five newspapers a day.
I think I got most of my education from William Randolph Hearst in my boyhood.
Fitzgerald and Hemingway and Faulkner, all of the geniuses of the 1920s into the 1930s, were writing for an audience of hungry readers, people who read spontaneously
for pleasure, for enjoyment.
And I don't think any reader, after, oh, the 60s, which have a lot to answer for, approaches, approached then, approaches now.
the reading experience, the little black marks on the pieces of paper, the way Fitzgerald's readers and Hemingway's readers and Faulkner's readers responded to the experience of reading literature.
And then the computers came along and turned everyone's brains to mush.
When did you become
I mean, you mentioned that William Randolph Hearst is your teacher as a child emerging in New York, as a youngster, but when do you become captured by fiction?
I grew up in a house without books.
I had no books at all as a child.
Finally, somebody gave me one book entitled Billion Blaze.
And finally is when?
Like, how old are you?
Just approximately.
Just, you know, a little kid or a teenager or what?
Seven, eight.
So you're a little kid.
All right.
But that was one book.
I had one book.
And my parents.
What you did was you read the same book over and over again.
I didn't understand why you needed two books.
And then I got to PS83 in the Bronx, where there was a room with a couple of hundred books in it.
That was the library.
And you were supposed to go there one hour a week and read.
Nobody in the school did that.
And the man in charge was Mr. Lipschitz.
And he granted me the extraordinary privilege of taking one book home Friday afternoon.
But I had to bring it back Monday morning.
And I read my way through that room.
And that was the beginning.
We've got a class to do, right, at 11 a.m.?
That's all right.
This is Scotty.
This is more important.
Scotty's more important.
Scotty is the patron of this room, of this collection.
She helped me.
She encouraged me.
I think she loved me.
I certainly loved her.
I cherished her.
I adored her.
She's the enabler, as they would say today.
And this collection would not be here were it not for the previous librarian, George Terry, the genius who hired Patrick Scott
the genius who bought the Heller Collection, who insisted that the Fitzgerald Collection came here, and who somehow made the acquisition of the Hemingway Collection possible.
George Terry died at 50.
This has supposedly taken the day we agreed, we made the deal for the Fitzgerald Collection.
Are you going to be around later today?
I'd like to come back and take some pictures, too.
Do you mind if I take some photographs?
Of course not.
But credit where credit is due.
We're just scratching the surface.
George deserves as much credit as I do.
And Scotty deserves more credit.
They're the enablers, but I have to say, you're still the guy who got it done.
If it hadn't been for Scotty, I wouldn't have done it.
Because I did it to please her.
May I say, with all due respect, I think you were driven a little bit more than that.
No, no.
I'm going to come back.
May I come back?
When?
If it had only the Isaac Rosenberg material, did Patrick tell you?
that there are three libraries in the world who have Rosenberg complete.
He did tell me that.
Yale, Oxford.
That's amazing.
USC.
Not the British Museum, not the Imperial War Museum.
Us.
That's amazing.
I'm going to just put my stuff there.
Sure.
Well, why don't we just continue our conversation a little bit?
Do you mind my shooting some pictures?
No, of course not.
And then I'd love to have one later with that briefcase.
Just, you know, casual stuff.
This represents an extraordinary achievement.
As you know, the great Gatsby's, the black orchid, this is worth about $150,000, the first printing and dust jacket.
When I was a graduate student, I bought it for $30, this copy.
And I didn't have $30.
I paid it off $5 at a time.
Excellent.
How did you find such a jacket?
Henry Winning had it.
As I said, I paid $30, and it's now worth $150,000.
But that's easy.
You know, if you want to already check $150,000, you can get one, no problem.
But here is the second printing with the corrected J. Here is the third printing with the blurbs.
It's better.
Here is the English edition using the American dust shack.
Now tell me why it is... Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.
It's going to get better.
Now.
There it is.
They couldn't sell it.
They couldn't give it away in London.
You're telling me this is the remainder copy?
This is the remainder copy.
Two and six.
Wow.
They sold it at seven shillings.
Only nobody wanted it.
So they lowered it at two and six.
And where does that go in the car?
What do you think?
And nobody else has it.
Nobody else has it?
Then they couldn't sell it at two and six, and they reduced it to two.
They knocked off sixpence, for Christ's sake.
How is something like this important to you as a scholar?
Are you indulging your passion as a collector here?
No, it's got nothing to do with collecting.
If The Great Gatsby is the great American novel, then anything that documents the reception and reputation is meaningful as literary history.
It is meaningful that The Great Gatsby was a flop.
in England and a relative failure in the United States when it was published.
The dopes didn't know how good it was, except for Gilbert Seldes.
Gilbert Seldes wrote that great review saying, Fitzgerald is now ahead of all of his contemporaries, which drove Hemingway bonkers.
So you could sit around and say, well, it wasn't a success in receptionist discipline.
The enemy of literary history, the enemy of literary biography,
is talk, is conversation.
This substitutes evidence for chit-chat.
And textually, however, the book is the same from one ... It's a photo offset reprint.
It's a photo offset.
Okay.
Well, no.
They use the same plates.
They shipped a duplicate set of plates to England.
Which is not true of other English editions.
Very interesting.
Where they, you know, they did the English spelling.
So that was a bomb?
That busted in English?
Yeah.
And what's, do you have an explanation for that?
It's too American.
Too American.
As you said earlier.
I was asking about his influence.
It's too American.